docs/tutorial-v3.0/actus-marlowe.adoc, before:

== ACTUS and Marlowe

This tutorial gives an introduction to the general idea of the ACTUS
standards for the algorithmic representation of financial contracts,
plus examples implemented in Marlowe.

=== ACTUS

The ACTUS Financial Research Foundation https://www.actusfrf.org has
created a standard for financial contracts, categorised by means of a
https://www.actusfrf.org/taxonomy[taxonomy] and described in a detailed
https://www.actusfrf.org/techspecs[technical specification].

The ACTUS standards build on the understanding that financial contracts
are legal agreements between two (or more) counterparties on the
exchange of future cash flows. Historically, such legal agreements are
described in natural language leading to ambiguity and artificial
diversity. As a response, the ACTUS standards define financial contracts
by means of a set of contractual terms and deterministic functions
mapping these terms onto future payment obligations. Thereby, it is
possible to describe the vast majority of financial instruments through
a set of little more than 30 Contract Types or modular templates,
respectively.

The ACTUS specifications provide a breadth of exercises for
implementation in Marlowe, and we illustrate an approach to this in the
following example.

=== Simple Zero Coupon Bond Example

A zero-coupon bond is a debt security that does not pay interest (a
coupon) but is issued at a discount, rendering profit at maturity
when the bond is redeemed for its full face value.

For example, an `investor` can buy a bond that costs 1000 Lovelace with 15% discount. She pays 850 Ada to the bond issuer before _start time_, here `10`.

Later, after _maturity date_, time `20` here, the investor can exchange the bond for its full notional, i.e. 1000 Lovelace.

[source,haskell]
----
When [
  (Case
     (Deposit
        (AccountId 0 "investor") 
        "investor"
        (Constant 850))
     (Pay
        (AccountId 0 "investor")
        (Party "issuer")
        (Constant 850)
        (When [
           (Case
              (Deposit
                 (AccountId 0 "investor") 
                 "issuer"
                 (Constant 1000))
              (Pay
                 (AccountId 0 "investor")
                 (Party "investor")
                 (Constant 1000) 
                 Refund))
            ] 
            20 
            Refund)))
     ] 
     10 
     Refund
----

This contract has a significant drawback. Once the `investor` has deposited the 850 Lovelace, it will be immediately paid to the `issuer` (if the `investor` does not invest in time, the contract ends). After that, two outcomes are possible

* the `issuer` deposits 1000 Lovelace in the `investor`{empty}'s account, and that is then immediately paid to the `investor` in full;
* if the `investor` doesn't make the deposit, then all the money in the contract is refunded, but there is _no_ money in the contract at this point, so the `investor` loses her money. 

How can we avoid this problem of the `issuer` defaulting?

There are at least two ways to solve this: we could ask the `issuer` to deposit the full amount before the contract begins, but that would defeat the object of issuing the bond in the first place. More realistically, we could ask a third party
to be a guarantor of the deal.

____
*Exercise*

Give a variant of the `+zeroCouponBond+` contract in which it is 
necessary for the `issuer` to put the full value of the up before the
bond is issued.
____
____
*Exercise*

Give a variant of the `+zeroCouponBond+` contract which also includes a
`+guarantor+` who puts up the full payment up before the bond is issued,
and who will pay that counterparty if the issuer defaults; if the issuer
does make the payment in time, then the guarantor should recover their
money.
____


=== Guaranteed Coupon Bond Example

This more complex bond involves an `investor` who deposits 1000 Ada, which is immediately paid to the `issuer`. The `issuer` then has to pay as interest 10 Ada every 10 slots. On maturity the investor should  receive back the interest plus the full value of the bond.

[source,haskell]
----
couponBondFor3Month12Percent =
    -- investor deposits 1000 Ada
    When [ Case (Deposit "investor" "investor" (Constant 1000))
        -- and pays it to the issuer
        (Pay "investor" (Party "issuer") (Constant 1000)
            -- after 10 slots expect to receive 10 Ada interest
            (When [ Case (Deposit "investor" "issuer" (Constant 10))
                -- and pay it to the investor
                (Pay "investor" (Party "investor" ) (Constant 10)
                    -- same for 2nd 10 slots 
                    (When [ Case (Deposit "investor" "issuer" (Constant 10))
                        (Pay "investor" (Party "investor" ) (Constant 10)
                            -- after maturity date investor
                            -- expects to receive notional + interest payment
                            (When [ Case (Deposit "investor" "issuer" (Constant 1010))
                                (Pay "investor" (Party "investor" ) (Constant 1010) Refund)]
                            (Slot 40)
                            Refund))]
                    (Slot 30)
                    Refund))]
            (Slot 20)
            Refund))]
    (Slot 10)
    Refund
----

____
*Exercise*

Give a variant of the `+zcouponBondFor3Month12Percent+` contract which also includes a
`+guarantor+` who puts up the full payment up before the bond is issued,
and who will pay that counterparty if the issuer defaults; if the issuer
does make the payment in time, then the guarantor should recover their
money.
____

IOHK plans to implement the full ACTUS standard using Marlowe and Plutus
over the coming year.

==== link:./playground-overview.adoc[Prev] link:./README.adoc[Up]

Commit message:

SCP-4242 - Update Slot to POSIXTime (#125)
Co-authored-by: Larry Adames <adames.larry@gmail.com>
* Rename Slot to POSIXTime in code
* Update documentation to use POSIXTime

docs/tutorial-v3.0/actus-marlowe.adoc, after:

== ACTUS and Marlowe

This tutorial gives an introduction to the general idea of the ACTUS
standards for the algorithmic representation of financial contracts,
plus examples implemented in Marlowe.

=== ACTUS

The ACTUS Financial Research Foundation https://www.actusfrf.org has
created a standard for financial contracts, categorised by means of a
https://www.actusfrf.org/taxonomy[taxonomy] and described in a detailed
https://www.actusfrf.org/techspecs[technical specification].

The ACTUS standards build on the understanding that financial contracts
are legal agreements between two (or more) counterparties on the
exchange of future cash flows. Historically, such legal agreements are
described in natural language leading to ambiguity and artificial
diversity. As a response, the ACTUS standards define financial contracts
by means of a set of contractual terms and deterministic functions
mapping these terms onto future payment obligations. Thereby, it is
possible to describe the vast majority of financial instruments through
a set of little more than 30 Contract Types or modular templates,
respectively.

The ACTUS specifications provide a breadth of exercises for
implementation in Marlowe, and we illustrate an approach to this in the
following example.

=== Simple Zero Coupon Bond Example

A zero-coupon bond is a debt security that does not pay interest (a
coupon) but is issued at a discount, rendering profit at maturity
when the bond is redeemed for its full face value.

For example, an `investor` can buy a bond that costs 1000 Lovelace with 15% discount. She pays 850 Ada to the bond issuer before _start time_, here `10`.

Later, after _maturity date_, time `20` here, the investor can exchange the bond for its full notional, i.e. 1000 Lovelace.

[source,haskell]
----
When [
  (Case
     (Deposit
        (AccountId 0 "investor") 
        "investor"
        (Constant 850))
     (Pay
        (AccountId 0 "investor")
        (Party "issuer")
        (Constant 850)
        (When [
           (Case
              (Deposit
                 (AccountId 0 "investor") 
                 "issuer"
                 (Constant 1000))
              (Pay
                 (AccountId 0 "investor")
                 (Party "investor")
                 (Constant 1000) 
                 Refund))
            ] 
            20 
            Refund)))
     ] 
     10 
     Refund
----

This contract has a significant drawback. Once the `investor` has deposited the 850 Lovelace, it will be immediately paid to the `issuer` (if the `investor` does not invest in time, the contract ends). After that, two outcomes are possible

* the `issuer` deposits 1000 Lovelace in the `investor`{empty}'s account, and that is then immediately paid to the `investor` in full;
* if the `investor` doesn't make the deposit, then all the money in the contract is refunded, but there is _no_ money in the contract at this point, so the `investor` loses her money. 

How can we avoid this problem of the `issuer` defaulting?

There are at least two ways to solve this: we could ask the `issuer` to deposit the full amount before the contract begins, but that would defeat the object of issuing the bond in the first place. More realistically, we could ask a third party
to be a guarantor of the deal.

____
*Exercise*

Give a variant of the `+zeroCouponBond+` contract in which it is 
necessary for the `issuer` to put the full value of the up before the
bond is issued.
____
____
*Exercise*

Give a variant of the `+zeroCouponBond+` contract which also includes a
`+guarantor+` who puts up the full payment up before the bond is issued,
and who will pay that counterparty if the issuer defaults; if the issuer
does make the payment in time, then the guarantor should recover their
money.
____


=== Guaranteed Coupon Bond Example

This more complex bond involves an `investor` who deposits 1000 Ada, which is immediately paid to the `issuer`. The `issuer` then has to pay as interest 10 Ada every 3,600,000 milliseconds (1 hour). On maturity the investor should  receive back the interest plus the full value of the bond.

[source,haskell]
----
couponBondFor3Month12Percent =
    -- investor deposits 1000 Ada
    When [ Case (Deposit "investor" "investor" (Constant 1000))
        -- and pays it to the issuer
        (Pay "investor" (Party "issuer") (Constant 1000)
            -- after 1 hour expect to receive 10 Ada interest
            (When [ Case (Deposit "investor" "issuer" (Constant 10))
                -- and pay it to the investor
                (Pay "investor" (Party "investor" ) (Constant 10)
                    -- same for 2nd hour 
                    (When [ Case (Deposit "investor" "issuer" (Constant 10))
                        (Pay "investor" (Party "investor" ) (Constant 10)
                            -- after maturity date investor
                            -- expects to receive notional + interest payment
                            (When [ Case (Deposit "investor" "issuer" (Constant 1010))
                                (Pay "investor" (Party "investor" ) (Constant 1010) Refund)]
                            (POSIXTime 14400000)
                            Refund))]
                    (POSIXTime 10800000)
                    Refund))]
            (POSIXTime 7200000)
            Refund))]
    (POSIXTime 3600000)
    Refund
----

____
*Exercise*

Give a variant of the `+zcouponBondFor3Month12Percent+` contract which also includes a
`+guarantor+` who puts up the full payment up before the bond is issued,
and who will pay that counterparty if the issuer defaults; if the issuer
does make the payment in time, then the guarantor should recover their
money.
____

IOHK plans to implement the full ACTUS standard using Marlowe and Plutus
over the coming year.

==== link:./playground-overview.adoc[Prev] link:./README.adoc[Up]
