docs/tutorial-v3.0/using-marlowe.adoc, before:

== Using Marlowe

:prewrap:

This tutorial shows you how to use Marlowe from within Haskell, and in
particular shows how to exercise a contract using the semantics given in
the link:./marlowe-semantics.md[earlier tutorial].

=== Marlowe in Haskell

This tutorial works in version 3.0 of Marlowe which can be found under
semantics-3.0 in the `+master+` branch of the repository:

[source,bash]
----
git clone https://github.com/input-output-hk/marlowe.git
cd semantics-3.0
----

=== Stepping through contracts

As we saw earlier the
semantics of a single transaction are defined by the function

[source,haskell]
----
computeTransaction :: TransactionInput -> State -> Contract -> TransactionOutput
----
where the types are defined like this:
[source,haskell]
----
data TransactionInput = TransactionInput
    { txInterval :: SlotInterval
    , txInputs   :: [Input] }

data TransactionOutput =
    TransactionOutput
        { txOutWarnings :: [ReduceWarning]
        , txOutPayments :: [Payment]
        , txOutState    :: State
        , txOutContract :: Contract }
    | Error TransactionError
----
and `States` are defined like this, with a helper function to define an initially empty state:

[source,haskell]
----
data State = State { accounts :: Map AccountId Money
                   , choices  :: Map ChoiceId ChosenNum
                   , boundValues :: Map ValueId Integer
                   , minSlot :: Slot }

emptyState :: Slot -> State
emptyState sn = State { accounts = Map.empty
                      , choices = Map.empty
                      , boundValues = Map.empty
                      , minSlot = sn }
----




We can use the facilities of `+ghci+` to step through a contract one
transaction at a time, and, here, we will do that with the embedded
escrow contract contained in
https://github.com/input-output-hk/marlowe/blob/master/semantics-3.0/src/Language/Marlowe/Examples/EscrowSimpleV2.hs[`+EscrowSimmpleV2.hs+`].

To single step, you can work in `+ghci+` like this, using the facility
to make local bindings:

[,haskell]
----
Prelude> :set -XOverloadedStrings
Prelude> :l Language/Marlowe/Examples/EscrowSimpleV2.hs 
 ...
*Lang...V2> let (TransactionOutput txWarn1 txPay1 state1 con1) = computeTransaction (TransactionInput (SlotInterval 0 0) [IDeposit "alice" "alice" 450]) (emptyState 0) contract
----

In doing this we have pattern matched the output of an application of `computeTransaction`, which takes three inputs: the second is an initial state (at slot number 0) and the third is the initial escrow contract. The first is a `TransactionInput` which contains a `SlotInterval` – here `SlotInterval 0 0` – and a deposit of 450 Lovelace from `"alice"` into her account `"alice"` namely `IDeposit "alice" "alice" 450`.

The output is matched with `TransactionOutput txWarn1 txPay1 state1 con1` so that we can examine the various components separately:

[source,haskell]
----
*Lang...V2> txWarn1
[]
*Lang...V2> txPay1
[]
*Lang...V2> state1
State {accounts = fromList [(AccountId 0 "alice",450)], choices = fromList [], boundValues = fromList [], minSlot = 0}
*Lang...V2> con1
When [Case (Choice (ChoiceId "choice" "alice") [Bound 0 1]) 
 ...
----
This shows that the transaction generates no warnings or payments, but updates the state to show the balance in the account `"alice"`, and updates the contract, ready to receive a choice from Alice or Bob.

In the next state the contract is waiting for input, and if both Alice and Bob agree to make a payment to Bob by choosing `0`, then a payment to Bob is generated. This is verified through this interaction in GHCI:

[source%wrap,haskell]
----
*Lang...V2> let (TransactionOutput txWarn2 txPay2 state2 con2) = computeTransaction (TransactionInput (SlotInterval 0 0) [IChoice (ChoiceId "choice" "alice") 0, IChoice (ChoiceId "choice" "bob") 0]) state1 con1
*Lang...V2> txPay2
[Payment "bob" 450]
*Lang...V2> con2
Refund
*Lang...V2> state2
State {accounts = fromList [], choices = fromList [(ChoiceId "choice" "alice",0),(ChoiceId "choice" "bob",0)], boundValues = fromList [], minSlot = 0}
----

An alternative way of doing this is to add these definitions to a
working file, e.g. `+Build.hs+`, where these definitions will be
preserved. Indeed, it would be very sensible to include some of the
definitions used above in such a file.

=== Alternative routes through the contract


The local
bindings are lost each time a `+:load+` or `+:l+` command is performed, so doing that allows us to re-use some earlier commands.
An alternative execution of the contract is given by

* First step: Alice deposits money as in the earlier example.
* Second step: Alice and Bob select different options. This can be done like this:

[source,haskell]
----
*Lang...V2> let (TransactionOutput txWarn2 txPay2 state2 con2) = computeTransaction (TransactionInput (SlotInterval 0 0) [IChoice (ChoiceId "choice" "alice") 0, IChoice (ChoiceId "choice" "bob") 1]) state1 con1
*Lang...V2> con2
When [Case (Choice (ChoiceId "choice" "carol") [Bound 1 1]) Refund,Case (Choice (ChoiceId "choice" "carol") [Bound 0 0]) (Pay (AccountId 0 "alice") (Party "bob") (Constant 450) Refund)] 100 Refund
*Lang...V2> state2
State {accounts = fromList [(AccountId 0 "alice",450)], choices = fromList [(ChoiceId "choice" "alice",0),(ChoiceId "choice" "bob",1)], boundValues = fromList [] , minSlot = 0}
----

This shows that we're now in a contract where the choice is up to Carol, and that there is still the 450 Lovelace in the `"alice"` account.

* Third step: Carol makes a choice. If she chooses 0, payment to Bob is made. If  she chooses 1, Alice is refunded. Let's do that now:

[source,haskell]
----
*Lang...V2> let (TransactionOutput txWarn3 txPay3 state3 con3) = computeTransaction  (TransactionInput (SlotInterval 0 0) [IChoice (ChoiceId "choice" "carol") 1]) state2 con2
*Lang...V2> txPay3
[Payment "alice" 450]
*Lang...V2> con3
Refund
*Lang...V2> state3
State {accounts = fromList [], choices = fromList [(ChoiceId "choice" "alice",0), (ChoiceId "choice" "bob",1),(ChoiceId "choice" "carol",1)], boundValues = fromList [], minSlot = 0}
----

So now the contract is ready to `Refund`, but it is clear from `state3` that there are no accounts containing non-zero balances, and so the contract is terminated.

Why is single stepping useful? It is the equivalent of debugging, and we
are able to see the internal state of the contract at each stage, the
contract continuation, i.e. what remains to be executed, and the actions
produced at each step.

____
*Exercise*

Explore some other ways of engaging with the contract - What happens
when Bob and Alice choose to refund the money to Alice? - What
happens if Bob and Alice disagree, but Carol sides with Bob?
____

=== There must be an easier way!

Yes, there is!

We look next at our tool, the Marlowe Playground, that
will capitalise on the fact that we are working in a DSL to _automate_
picking the right inputs and allow users to interact with contracts.

==== link:./embedded-marlowe.adoc[Prev] link:./README.adoc[Up] link:./playground-overview.adoc[Next]

Commit message:

Added note about copy and paste.

docs/tutorial-v3.0/using-marlowe.adoc, after:

== Using Marlowe

:prewrap:

This tutorial shows you how to use Marlowe from within Haskell, and in
particular shows how to exercise a contract using the semantics given in
the link:./marlowe-semantics.md[earlier tutorial].

=== Marlowe in Haskell

This tutorial works in version 3.0 of Marlowe which can be found under
semantics-3.0 in the `+master+` branch of the repository:

[source,bash]
----
git clone https://github.com/input-output-hk/marlowe.git
cd semantics-3.0
----

=== Stepping through contracts

As we saw earlier the
semantics of a single transaction are defined by the function

[source,haskell]
----
computeTransaction :: TransactionInput -> State -> Contract -> TransactionOutput
----
where the types are defined like this:
[source,haskell]
----
data TransactionInput = TransactionInput
    { txInterval :: SlotInterval
    , txInputs   :: [Input] }

data TransactionOutput =
    TransactionOutput
        { txOutWarnings :: [ReduceWarning]
        , txOutPayments :: [Payment]
        , txOutState    :: State
        , txOutContract :: Contract }
    | Error TransactionError
----
and `States` are defined like this, with a helper function to define an initially empty state:

[source,haskell]
----
data State = State { accounts :: Map AccountId Money
                   , choices  :: Map ChoiceId ChosenNum
                   , boundValues :: Map ValueId Integer
                   , minSlot :: Slot }

emptyState :: Slot -> State
emptyState sn = State { accounts = Map.empty
                      , choices = Map.empty
                      , boundValues = Map.empty
                      , minSlot = sn }
----




We can use the facilities of `+ghci+` to step through a contract one
transaction at a time, and, here, we will do that with the embedded
escrow contract contained in
https://github.com/input-output-hk/marlowe/blob/master/semantics-3.0/src/Language/Marlowe/Examples/EscrowSimpleV2.hs[`+EscrowSimmpleV2.hs+`].

To single step, you can work in `+ghci+` like this, using the facility
to make local bindings:

[,haskell]
----
Prelude> :set -XOverloadedStrings
Prelude> :l Language/Marlowe/Examples/EscrowSimpleV2.hs 
 ...
*Lang...V2> let (TransactionOutput txWarn1 txPay1 state1 con1) = computeTransaction (TransactionInput (SlotInterval 0 0) [IDeposit "alice" "alice" 450]) (emptyState 0) contract
----

In doing this we have pattern matched the output of an application of `computeTransaction`, which takes three inputs: the second is an initial state (at slot number 0) and the third is the initial escrow contract. The first is a `TransactionInput` which contains a `SlotInterval` – here `SlotInterval 0 0` – and a deposit of 450 Lovelace from `"alice"` into her account `"alice"` namely `IDeposit "alice" "alice" 450`.

NOTE: If you want to try this for yourself in ghci, you can copy and paste from the code examples: they are in horizontally scrolling windows.

The output is matched with `TransactionOutput txWarn1 txPay1 state1 con1` so that we can examine the various components separately:

[source,haskell]
----
*Lang...V2> txWarn1
[]
*Lang...V2> txPay1
[]
*Lang...V2> state1
State {accounts = fromList [(AccountId 0 "alice",450)], choices = fromList [], boundValues = fromList [], minSlot = 0}
*Lang...V2> con1
When [Case (Choice (ChoiceId "choice" "alice") [Bound 0 1]) 
 ...
----
This shows that the transaction generates no warnings or payments, but updates the state to show the balance in the account `"alice"`, and updates the contract, ready to receive a choice from Alice or Bob.

In the next state the contract is waiting for input, and if both Alice and Bob agree to make a payment to Bob by choosing `0`, then a payment to Bob is generated. This is verified through this interaction in GHCI:

[source%wrap,haskell]
----
*Lang...V2> let (TransactionOutput txWarn2 txPay2 state2 con2) = computeTransaction (TransactionInput (SlotInterval 0 0) [IChoice (ChoiceId "choice" "alice") 0, IChoice (ChoiceId "choice" "bob") 0]) state1 con1
*Lang...V2> txPay2
[Payment "bob" 450]
*Lang...V2> con2
Refund
*Lang...V2> state2
State {accounts = fromList [], choices = fromList [(ChoiceId "choice" "alice",0),(ChoiceId "choice" "bob",0)], boundValues = fromList [], minSlot = 0}
----

An alternative way of doing this is to add these definitions to a
working file, e.g. `+Build.hs+`, where these definitions will be
preserved. Indeed, it would be very sensible to include some of the
definitions used above in such a file.

=== Alternative routes through the contract


The local
bindings are lost each time a `+:load+` or `+:l+` command is performed, so doing that allows us to re-use some earlier commands.
An alternative execution of the contract is given by

* First step: Alice deposits money as in the earlier example.
* Second step: Alice and Bob select different options. This can be done like this:

[source,haskell]
----
*Lang...V2> let (TransactionOutput txWarn2 txPay2 state2 con2) = computeTransaction (TransactionInput (SlotInterval 0 0) [IChoice (ChoiceId "choice" "alice") 0, IChoice (ChoiceId "choice" "bob") 1]) state1 con1
*Lang...V2> con2
When [Case (Choice (ChoiceId "choice" "carol") [Bound 1 1]) Refund,Case (Choice (ChoiceId "choice" "carol") [Bound 0 0]) (Pay (AccountId 0 "alice") (Party "bob") (Constant 450) Refund)] 100 Refund
*Lang...V2> state2
State {accounts = fromList [(AccountId 0 "alice",450)], choices = fromList [(ChoiceId "choice" "alice",0),(ChoiceId "choice" "bob",1)], boundValues = fromList [] , minSlot = 0}
----

This shows that we're now in a contract where the choice is up to Carol, and that there is still the 450 Lovelace in the `"alice"` account.

* Third step: Carol makes a choice. If she chooses 0, payment to Bob is made. If  she chooses 1, Alice is refunded. Let's do that now:

[source,haskell]
----
*Lang...V2> let (TransactionOutput txWarn3 txPay3 state3 con3) = computeTransaction  (TransactionInput (SlotInterval 0 0) [IChoice (ChoiceId "choice" "carol") 1]) state2 con2
*Lang...V2> txPay3
[Payment "alice" 450]
*Lang...V2> con3
Refund
*Lang...V2> state3
State {accounts = fromList [], choices = fromList [(ChoiceId "choice" "alice",0), (ChoiceId "choice" "bob",1),(ChoiceId "choice" "carol",1)], boundValues = fromList [], minSlot = 0}
----

So now the contract is ready to `Refund`, but it is clear from `state3` that there are no accounts containing non-zero balances, and so the contract is terminated.

Why is single stepping useful? It is the equivalent of debugging, and we
are able to see the internal state of the contract at each stage, the
contract continuation, i.e. what remains to be executed, and the actions
produced at each step.

____
*Exercise*

Explore some other ways of engaging with the contract - What happens
when Bob and Alice choose to refund the money to Alice? - What
happens if Bob and Alice disagree, but Carol sides with Bob?
____

=== There must be an easier way!

Yes, there is!

We look next at our tool, the Marlowe Playground, that
will capitalise on the fact that we are working in a DSL to _automate_
picking the right inputs and allow users to interact with contracts.

==== link:./embedded-marlowe.adoc[Prev] link:./README.adoc[Up] link:./playground-overview.adoc[Next]
