docs/tutorial-v2.0/playground-overview.md, before:

# The Marlowe Playground

This tutorial gives an overview of the Marlowe Playground, an online tool that allows users to interact with and simulate the operation of embedded Marlowe contracts. It is available at [https://prod.meadow.marlowe.iohkdev.io](https://prod.meadow.marlowe.iohkdev.io).

## Introducing the Marlowe Playground

For Marlowe to be usable in practice, users need to be able to understand how contracts will behave once deployed to the blockchain, but without doing the deployment. We can do that by simulating their behaviour off-chain, interactively stepping through the evaluation of a contract in the browser-based tool, the Marlowe Playground, a web tool that supports the interactive construction, revision, and simulation of smart-contracts written in Marlowe V2.0.

 We do this in two stages, represented by two tabs in the tool:

- in the first we can design and edit a Marlowe contract, using features of Haskell, and then transform it to a pure Marlowe contract, and
- in the second we interact with that pure Marlowe contract, simulating inputs from participants, observations, and so forth.

## Developing embedded contracts

The editor supports Haskell development, with syntax highlighting, and on clicking the **Compile** button the Haskell file will be compiled, and the top-level definition of `contract` will be evaluated to a pure Marlowe contract, which is made visible below the Haskell pane. Once we are happy with the result, we can send it to the simulator pane by clicking **Send to simulator**.

![The Haskell editor](./pix/haskell-2.png)

The figure shows a screenshot of the Marlowe Playground in the middle of developing an “Escrow” contract; other contract examples, based on the [ACTUS](./actus-marlowe.md) standard, can be loaded by clicking on the named **Demos** below the **HASKELL EDITOR** tab.

## Simulating Marlowe contracts

The second tab in the Marlowe Playground allows users to simulate Marlowe contracts transaction by transaction. Typically these are contracts first developed in the Haskell editor, but it is also possible to modify the contract under execution, shown in the **Marlowe Contract** pane at the foot of the page. At each stage in execution, this shows the contract _still to be executed_. 

Other facilities presented by the tool are

- Towards the top of the screen, the **Input Composer** which provides us with all the  actions, choices and observations _that are relevant at this stage of contract execution_. This smart interface helps us to validate contracts: are we being offered what we would expect at each stage in the execution?

- The inputs are gathered in the **Transaction Composer**, where inputs are sequenced and then the whole transaction can be signed by any participants. Again, the interface is smart in suggesting which signatories there might be for the transaction.

- Once a transaction is composed, it can be applied by choosing the
  - **Apply Transaction** button applies the transaction, also
  - the **Next Block** button can be applied at any time to advance to the next block without applying any (more) transactions, and
  - the **Reset** button is used to reset the contract and state to their initial values.

- As the contract is evaluated, the internal state of the system changes, and this is reflected in the values show in the  **State** section in the middle of the screen. We revisit this below.

![Marlowe Playground simulation](./pix/simulation.png)

## Building inputs and transactions

We can build our first transaction by selecting the purple plus symbol `+` to the left of the potential inputs. If we select the first action – a commitment by `alice` – we see

![Simulation step 1](./pix/step1.png)

where this potential action has disappeared, and the signatories now contain person 1. And under the signatures we can see that the transaction is expecting to obtain 450 ADA from person 1. If we choose to apply this transaction, we then see this
commitment by `alice` – we see the following changes in the screen.

- The input composer presents a different set of potential inputs, with the commitment _removed_.
- The transaction composer is reset, too.
- The state now shows that there is an active commitment, and gives its id, owner, value and time to expire (timeout).
- The contract has also evolved to a `When` construct that waits for a choice.

![Simulation step 2](./pix/step2.png)

We could then advance to the next block, or indeed a number of steps, and the current block is shown below the three buttons, together with the amount of money committed to the contract.

Taking another step to reflect that Alice has received the cat from Bob, participants 2 (Bob) and 3 (Carol) choose value 1, and make that into a transaction:

![Simulation step 3](./pix/step3.png)

Applying that transaction makes the contract evolve to the payment of the money to Bob, as is reflected in the potential action shown in the input composer here.

![Simulation step 4](./pix/step4.png)

> __Exercise__
>  
> Use the Marlowe Playground to interact with the `escrow` contract in the various scenarios discussed earlier, in the tutorial on [using Marlowe](./using-marlowe.md).
>
> Explore making some changes to the contract, and interactions with those modified contracts.
> 


> __Exercise__
>  
> Use the Marlowe Playground to explore the other contracts presented in there: the deposit incentive contract, and the crowd-funding example.
> 



### [Prev](./using-marlowe.md)  [Up](./README.md) [Next](./actus-marlowe.md)

Commit message:

Revised screenshots for Marlowe Playground; added info about Undo.

docs/tutorial-v2.0/playground-overview.md, after:

# The Marlowe Playground

This tutorial gives an overview of the Marlowe Playground, an online tool that allows users to interact with and simulate the operation of embedded Marlowe contracts. It is available at [https://prod.meadow.marlowe.iohkdev.io](https://prod.meadow.marlowe.iohkdev.io).

## Introducing the Marlowe Playground

For Marlowe to be usable in practice, users need to be able to understand how contracts will behave once deployed to the blockchain, but without doing the deployment. We can do that by simulating their behaviour off-chain, interactively stepping through the evaluation of a contract in the browser-based tool, the Marlowe Playground, a web tool that supports the interactive construction, revision, and simulation of smart-contracts written in Marlowe V2.0.

 We do this in two stages, represented by two tabs in the tool:

- in the first we can design and edit a Marlowe contract, using features of Haskell, and then transform it to a pure Marlowe contract, and
- in the second we interact with that pure Marlowe contract, simulating inputs from participants, observations, and so forth.

## Developing embedded contracts

The editor supports Haskell development, with syntax highlighting, and on clicking the **Compile** button the Haskell file will be compiled, and the top-level definition of `contract` will be evaluated to a pure Marlowe contract, which is made visible below the Haskell pane. Once we are happy with the result, we can send it to the simulator pane by clicking **Send to simulator**.

![The Haskell editor](./pix/haskell-2.png)

The figure shows a screenshot of the Marlowe Playground in the middle of developing an “Escrow” contract; other contract examples, based on the [ACTUS](./actus-marlowe.md) standard, can be loaded by clicking on the named **Demos** below the **HASKELL EDITOR** tab.

## Simulating Marlowe contracts

The second tab in the Marlowe Playground allows users to simulate Marlowe contracts transaction by transaction. Typically these are contracts first developed in the Haskell editor, but it is also possible to modify the contract under execution, shown in the **Marlowe Contract** pane at the foot of the page. At each stage in execution, this shows the contract _still to be executed_. 

Other facilities presented by the tool are

- Towards the top of the screen, the **Input Composer** which provides us with all the  actions, choices and observations _that are relevant at this stage of contract execution_. This smart interface helps us to validate contracts: are we being offered what we would expect at each stage in the execution?

- The inputs are gathered in the **Transaction Composer**, where inputs are sequenced and then the whole transaction can be signed by any participants. Again, the interface is smart in suggesting which signatories there might be for the transaction.

- Once a transaction is composed, it can be applied by choosing the
  - **Apply Transaction** button applies the transaction, also
  - the **Next Block** button can be applied at any time to advance to the next block without applying any (more) transactions, and
  - the **Reset** button is used to reset the contract and state to their initial values.

- As the contract is evaluated, the internal state of the system changes, and this is reflected in the values show in the  **State** section in the middle of the screen. We revisit this below.

![Marlowe Playground simulation](./pix/simulation.png)

## Building inputs and transactions

We can build our first transaction by selecting the purple plus symbol `+` to the left of the potential inputs. If we select the first action – a commitment by `alice` – we see

![Simulation step 1](./pix/step1.png)

where this potential action has disappeared, and the signatories now contain person 1. And under the signatures we can see that the transaction is expecting to obtain 450 ADA from person 1. If we choose to apply this transaction, we then see this
commitment by `alice` – we see the following changes in the screen.

- The input composer presents a different set of potential inputs, with the commitment _removed_.
- The transaction composer is reset, too.
- The state now shows that there is an active commitment, and gives its id, owner, value and time to expire (timeout).
- The contract has also evolved to a `When` construct that waits for a choice.

![Simulation step 2](./pix/step2.png)

We could then advance to the next block, or indeed a number of steps, and the current block is shown below the three buttons, together with the amount of money committed to the contract.

Taking another step to reflect that Alice has received the cat from Bob, participants 2 (Bob) and 3 (Carol) choose value 1, and make that into a transaction:

![Simulation step 3](./pix/step3.png)

Applying that transaction makes the contract evolve to the payment of the money to Bob, as is reflected in the potential action shown in the input composer here.

![Simulation step 4](./pix/step4.png)

At any point it is possible to _undo_ a step by selecting the __Undo__ button. From the current state, doing this twice will return us to the state shown next. From there we can choose to explore _alternatives_ to the choice that we made previously.

![Simulation step 5](./pix/step5.png)

At any point in the simulation, we can also completely _reset_ the system to its initial state by pressing the __Reset__ button.


> __Exercise__
>  
> Use the Marlowe Playground to interact with the `escrow` contract in the various scenarios discussed earlier, in the tutorial on [using Marlowe](./using-marlowe.md).
>
> Explore making some changes to the contract, and interactions with those modified contracts.
> 


> __Exercise__
>  
> Use the Marlowe Playground to explore the other contracts presented in there: the deposit incentive contract, and the crowd-funding example.
> 



### [Prev](./using-marlowe.md)  [Up](./README.md) [Next](./actus-marlowe.md)
